Theresa May’s Brexit deal has been voted
down by MPs -meaning we’re getting closer
and closer to a no-deal Brexit.
But what could no-deal Brexit actually mean
for you?
So you wake up on March 30th 2019 and the
UK has just left the EU.
The plan was to have a deal in place by the
time we left - making sure our exit was nice
and smooth, with a transition period helping
to ease us out of the union.
I know we can get a deal that delivers for
Britain.
We will be able to reach a deal that will
work for us and work for them.
I’m absolutely confident we’re going to
get a good deal with the EU.
But now, none of that is in place - so what
the hell is going to happen?
One of the first questions would be - what
about the UK border?
If there's no agreement about customs checks,
there could be big delays.
Lorries that used to be waved through will
probably now need their details checked.
That’s one truck?
That’s one truck of what we, as customs
clearing agents in Dover and the UK do.
In a no-deal scenario, you’re looking at
100% worth of checks like this?
Yes.
Could you cope with that?
No.
According to the freight industry, that could
mean queues of up to 17 miles at the Port
of Dover.
Because of that, there are fears it could
disrupt deliveries of food and medicine coming
into the UK.
However, the Deputy Mayor of Calais has said
that on the French side, they have been preparing
for no deal for over a year.
And he says there will definitely be no delays
at the border in the event of no deal.
Now, problems at the ports are one thing.
But there could be even bigger problems at
the land border between Northern Ireland and
the Republic of Ireland.
There used to be a physical border here, with
customs checks.
But for many Irish nationalists, this was
seen as a symbol of British occupation.
All those barriers were removed as part of
the Northern Ireland peace process.
So, for many on both sides of the border,
putting barriers up once again would feel
like a return to the troubles of the past.
But the EU has said that if there’s no Brexit
deal, there’d be no alternative to a “hard
border”.
So on top of all the trade delays a no-deal
Brexit could cause - there’s also the possibility
of renewed violence.
- There is real potential for trouble of extremists
wanting to exploit the chaos of a possible
no-deal Brexit?
Yeah, well we’ve seen that time and time
again where there is an issue, no matter what
the issue is in Northern Ireland, that people
do tend to come onto the streets. For either
a short period of time or a more protracted
period of time. And that we do see some serious
public order - and indeed terrorist-related
violence - as a result of that.
Now, what if you've booked a flight to Europe
- but then we have a no-deal Brexit?
Well, airlines will lose their automatic right
to fly between Britain and EU member states.
Authorities would need to try to reach some
sort of an agreement on air travel so that
planes could carry on landing in other countries.
The EU has said there is an emergency plan
in place to ensure some air routes continue
operating in the event of a no-deal. So hopefully
your holiday plans won’t be affected.
And also, the UK government would try and
get a more comprehensive agreement - while
EU countries, they still want to fly here,
so it’s in their interests to keep the airspace
open.
But if things don’t go to plan, it could
result in planes being grounded - meaning
you won’t be able to take off, and could
be left stranded.
Now, what about those of you waking up in
the UK on March 30th who are EU citizens?
Well, your status in the UK will eventually
change after a couple of years. Although that
would happen regardless of whether we leave
with a deal or not.
That's because freedom of movement will end
- so EU citizens will no longer have an automatic
right to live and work here.
Similarly, Brits who live in Europe will also
lose those rights - as well as losing your
guarantee of free healthcare in the EU.
And on top of that, the value of your UK state
pension could be at risk down the line.
However, before you start panicking, the government
has said there is no need to worry.
That’s because, if you're an EU citizen
living in the UK, you can apply for Settled
Status for £65.
So, providing you can prove you live here
and that you're not a security threat, all
of your current rights and privileges will
be protected.
Once you’ve got Settled Status, you can
carry on living here just like before.
EU countries are also in the process of announcing
similar schemes for Brits living abroad.
But what other changes are you likely to notice?
Well, perhaps the biggest risk of a no-deal
Brexit is the potential shock to the economy.
The Bank of England thinks the value of the
pound will tumble, the economy will shrink
- and that it’ll be even worse than the
2008 financial crash.
The country is not yet fully prepared for
a cliff-edge Brexit.
Now that's based on a lot of detailed predictions
- but remember, they have sometimes been wrong
before.
A big part of our economy is our trading relationship
with Europe.
Being in the EU means that we can buy and
sell goods with EU countries without paying
tariffs at the border.
But if there’s no deal, Britain would have
to treat all countries equally - whether they're
in the EU or not - that’s according to rules
set by the World Trade Organisation, the WTO.
So what does that mean? Well, take cabbages
for example.
Under WTO rules, we could introduce charges
on cabbages coming into the UK from the EU.
That means cabbages - and other food - would
get more expensive for me and you.
On the other hand, it might be good for the
British farming industry - because it would
make their cabbages more competitive.
Alternatively, we could just set extra charges
really low - or even at zero percent.
But because we now have to treat all countries
equally - that would apply to the whole world.
So, on the plus side, that might help keep
food prices low for consumers, like you.
But it would also mean that British farmers
might be undercut by competitors from around
the world.
And, don’t forget, because of issues at
the border that we spoke about before, EU
countries importing stuff to the UK might
face extra paperwork and customs checks.
That all costs money - and it’s likely that
you, the consumer, would have to foot the
bill.
So will there be chaos if we leave without
a deal?
Not necessarily.
The government has been preparing for this
for a while - and it says contingency plans
are in place.
For instance, there's an airfield near the
Port of Dover which will be converted into
a lorry park - and companies have been hired
to run extra ferry services to carry goods.
Those measures are designed to ease congestion
at one of Britain’s busiest ports.
The government has also announced plans to
stockpile medicines and fly in vital supplies
if necessary.
- The stockpiling is going to be done by pharmaceutical
companies and we will support them, and are
supporting them, in doing that.
A lot depends on whether the government will
be able to strike so-called "mini-deals" on
different aspects of life after a no-deal
Brexit.
These would be separate, stand-alone agreements
to solve problems like air traffic, or congestion
at the borders.
But the EU has insisted it will only agree
to basic emergency measures - allowing some
flights and cross-border trade for a limited
time.
And don’t forget that many MPs, they really
don’t want a no-deal Brexit and have said
they will try to ensure it doesn’t happen.
In January, for example, Labour and Tory MPs
came together to defeat the government and
give MPs more control in the event of a no-deal
Brexit.
I do also feel, having spent the past six
or seven months on the backbenches talking
to various other backbenchers, that parliament
will stop a no deal.
So what about the rest of Brexit?
Most EU law will simply be converted into
British law - so it’s unlikely you’ll
notice any sudden changes to the way the way
your life is governed.
But there will be one huge constitutional
change: EU institutions will immediately cease
to have any say in how the UK is run - so
every future decision will come straight from
our Parliament.
So that’s how a no-deal Brexit could affect
you, come March 30th - what do you think?
Is it really that bad - or will things work
out better than predicted?
Let us know in the comments below - and tell
us anything you’re confused about as Brexit
Day approaches.